---
layout: post
title:  "New Site Hosting"
date:   2017-09-15 10:41:00 -0600
tags: meta
---
Last night, I finally got all of the pieces together for hosting of
this site.  Here, I will summarize what solution I ended up going
with, and a little about my future plans.

## Static site

After convincing myself that Markdown is only terrible (instead of
utterly terrible), and that it would be ok for short postings like I
intend to make here.  I got this site set up with Jekyll for static
site generation.

There was a bit of a learning curve with [Jekyll][jekyll], largely
because Ubuntu 17.04 has a fairly old version as a package.  I
eventually just removed it entirely, and set up bundle following the
instructions at the Jekyll site.

[jekyll]: http://jekyllrb.com/

The only thing not documented was to get gem to stop trying to install
software in the system directory.  I'm not sure why this concept is so
difficult for these languages, but I've encountered the same problem
with pip (which at least recently, now has a `--user` flag to install
in one's home directory).  The rule should be simple, the
language-specific tools need to leave the platforms directories alone.
Regardless, all I had to do to make the rest of the instructions work
is set:
``` bash
export GEM_HOME=~/gems
```
in my startup script, and everything works.  I can run Jekyll with:
``` bash
bundle exec jekyll build
```
to build the static site (placed in a `_site` directory), or run
``` bash
bundle exec jekyll serve
```
to serve up the pages locally.

## Name service

Until very recently, I've been using Linode for my DNS.  I'm mostly
happy with it, except that I find it is a bit slow to propagate
changes to its own nameservers.  I also didn't find widely available
command line tools to modify records.

After some experimenting with AWS's Route 53 DNS service, I decided to
use them as my nameserver.  The cost is $0.50 per month, which is
cheaper than Linode.  However, the Linode DNS requires that I pay for
at least one host at Linode, which restricts my hosting to them.

I'm keeping my registration with [Namecheap][namecheap] for now.  I
have 1.5 years left on what I paid, and their customer support was
able to change my name servers, even though the changes made in the UI
never seemed to apply.

[namecheap]: https://www.namecheap.com/

As the expiration approaches, I will likely consider AWS for the
registration as well.  The price is competitive, and AWS doesn't
charge extra for privacy on the whois record.

## Hosting

I initially considered using [GitHub Pages][gh-pages] to host my site.
This is still open as a possibility.  My main reason for avoiding it
is that it doesn't support using HTTPS with a custom domain.  There is
a workaround using [CloudFront][cloudfront] to distribute the data.
Amazon will provide certificates for sites coming from CloudFront, but
the data is still transferred unencrypted between GitHub and
CloudFront's servers.  It technically would make the hosting no longer
free, but the access patterns of my website are low enough, that it
would probably be less than the $0.01 billing threshold.

For now, I ended up going with S3 for the hosting.  Setting it up was
a little complicated, but once done, distributing is fairly easy (`aws
s3 sync`).  Again, my access patterns will probably keep this under
$0.01 per month.  It is a little hard to tell, because I also use S3
for backup purposes, and that access does cost a little.

Although S3 is a bit complex, the documentation is pretty good, and I
was able to configure access permissions and such mostly by copying
snippets of JSON off of samples, and making minor changes for my
purposes.

## Publishing flow

Now that things are setup, I go through roughly this process:

1. On my Linux box, I create a new file
   `davidborg/_posts/yyyy-mm-dd-title.md`, copy and edit the header
   from another post, and then write the post.
2. In another window, I run `bundle exec jekyll serve`, and fire up a
   web browser to preview the post.
3. Edit/refresh until I'm happy with how the post looks.
4. Commit the post to git.
5. Run a script that does a `jekyll build` and uses the AWS tools to
   sync the data with the S3 bucket holding the website.

[cloudfront]: https://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront/

[gh-pages]: https://pages.github.com/
